---
layout: standard
title:  "Setting up a development server"
excerpt: "All you need to know to get your three.js app running locally"
permalink: /tutorials/0.3-development-server/
sidebar:
  nav: "tutorials"
comments: true
css:
  standard
---

It's possible to run files locally using the `file://` protocol (so that if you open a file called `example.html` you will see `file://example.html` in the address bar), and this will work just fine while we are creating everything at runtime. However when it comes to loading files such as textures or models we'll run into problems due to security restrictions on loading local files.

You can disable these restrictions in your browser (see [How to run things locally](https://threejs.org/docs/#manual/introduction/How-to-run-thing-locally) on [threejs.org](https://threejs.org), which also has some information on setting up a local server), however it is not recommended for security reasons (imagine some nasty website getting access to the files on your computer because you disabled these!). If you do decide to do this, you should designate one browser for development and disable the restrictions on that. But then you lose the ability to easily test your app on multiple browsers. So, the best thing to do is set up a development server on your local machine.

When it comes to deciding on a development server, there are basically two types. First and easiest to set up is a simple http server, such as the ones that come with many programming environments (python and ruby both have one, for example). We'll be making extensive use of node.js in this series, so we'll go over how to set up a node.js server here.

## Running a basic http server using node.js

For the purposes of this tutorial series, we'll be making use of node.js so we'll go over how to set up a node.js http server here. If you don't already have node.js installed, the [website](https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager/) has instructions for all major operating systems. Next, you can install a simple server using:

{% highlight bash %}
npm install -g http-server
{% endhighlight %}

(the `-g` flag means install the server globally so it can be used from any directory). Then, supposing you have a project `C:/tutorials/first-steps/1.1/development-server/index.html`, from within that directory run

{% highlight bash %}
http-server . -p 8000
{% endhighlight %}

Now if you navigate to `localhost:8000/index.html` in your browser you should see the contents of the file. If you run into problems, try changing to a different port number - e.g. change `8000` to `4000`. If you still have problems, try allowing access to that port in your firewall.

## Set up a full production server

A simple http server will not allow us to use a backend language such as php, use databases in our app, send emails from a contact form, or many other things. If we need to do any of those we'll have to set up a full production server environment (or a stripped down version of one).

We will not cover in detail how to do that, but here are some suggestions to get you started.

### Ubuntu (or other linux flavours)

If you are running Ubuntu or some other linux environment, then you  will most likely want to set up a LAMP server, which stands for Linux, Apache, MYSQL, PHP (although MYSQL is often swapped for a different database system).

You can either install all the required applications together, as described [here](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ApacheMySQLPHP#Hint:_Server_Guide):
{% highlight bash %}
 sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install lamp-server^
{% endhighlight %}

Or follow a step by step instructions in the above article if you run into any problems.

### Windows

The equivalent of a LAMP server in Windows is a WAMP server. There are several options for setting one up, two of the most well known are [XAMPP](https://www.apachefriends.org/index.html) and [WAMP](http://www.wampserver.com/en/), both of which have good instructions on their websites. Personally I've used XAMPP and found it relatively easy to get up and running.

### OSX

The equivalent on OSX is, wait for it... a MAMP server! I personally don't have any experience developing on a mac so I'm not going to offer any advice here. But there is no shortage of tutorials a quick search away.

## Using the production server

Once you have set up your server, you will want to create a virtual host for your app, which directs something like `localhost/threejs-tutorials/` to the directory `C:/tutorials/first-steps/1.1/development-server/`. Again, detailing how to do this will depend on how you set up your server and we will not go into it here. But the instructions on the [Ubuntu official docs](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ApacheMySQLPHP#Virtual_Hosts) are good, and the principles will be the same whatever system you are using so it's a good starting point.
